---
layout: post
comments: false
title:  "Manhattan Bridge"
excerpt: "This is for personal use, not a new post"
date:  2024-06-04
---

***This was written in Dec, 2023. ***
## Thesis
As a hard-money lender, Manhattan Bridge (LOAN)'s high ROA and low debt level surpassed its peers in the same sector. LOAN has built a reputation among small real estate developers in NY metropolitan regions. Its management are extremely risk-averse, frugal and shareholder-value-oriented. I identified 
the average loan balance of its loan portfolio as its main profit driver. Even just assuming a growth rate as half as the company's historical level, completely ignoring its growth opportunities in FL, Manhattan Bridge is still traded at around 50% discount relative to its estimated intrinsic value (~100M）.


## Business
<!---one-sentence summary of the business--->
LOAN's business is very simple to understand. It originates first mortagage secured, float-rated loans to small real estate developers, 
and collect a 9%-12% interests and 0-2% origination fees. In some way its very similar to a bank business. 

<!---As Buffett has said: bank is a good business as long as you don't do dumb things..". Therefore, throughout this analysis, I try to demonstrate the prudence of LOAN's management.--->

<!---who are customers, why they choose LOAN, reputation/repeat customer). --->
LOAN's customers are mainly small-scale developers from HY metro area, who flip properties for quick profits. Thus the properties secured against are typically not income generating.
Customers go to LOAN for its ability to approve and fund loans quickly and efficiently. 
Loan has been operating in NY metro area since 2007 and built a reputation among its customers. A significant portion of LOAN's business comes from repeat customers, 
who are also a referral source for new borrowers. 

To seek evidence of LOAN's reputation, I went over its Google Map reviews. It got three offices in NY with rates of 5,5 and 4.8. Of 59 reviews, I do not see a single one making a complain and the staff replied each one of them to express gratitute. 
## Competitors/Peers
To compare LOAN's business performance against its competitors, I collected data from the following campanies: SACH, CMTG, BXMT, ACRE and ACR. The main business of each of these REITs is originiating loans for real estate investors/developers. Several of them also invest in real estate properties directly. Among them only SACH strikes the most similarity with LOAN in the sense that both of them only originating loans secured by first mortgage. Rest of the companys on the list also originating subordinate loan, mezzainies loan etc. One thing to notice is that most of the REIT on this lists are externally managed by large real estate investment company so that they can share expertises and resources.

## Balance sheet
### Assets
<!----Loan portfolio--->
<!----Debts/ leverage ratio/ compare in industry--->
As of Sep 30,2023, Loan has 70.7M loans receivable and 1.3M interests receivable on loans, constituting 99% of its assets. So here would be good place to take deeper look of Manhattan Bridge's loan portfolio and to compare it with those of its competitors.
(some of the numbers are from 2020 10K, so I assume these loan properties does not change dramatically in 2023)

|Company|Loan #|average loan size|average term to maturity|average interest rate|subordinate mortgage |residential/commercial|customer geography|
|-------|------|-----------------|------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------|------------------|
|LOAN   |122   |0.6M             |6M                      |10.44%               |0                    |80%/15%               |NY(95%)           |
|SACH   |444   |1M               |8M                      |10.99%               |0                    |50%/33.6%             |CT(43%), FL(23%), NY(12%)|
|CMTG   |77    |122M             |3Y                      |8.6%                 |3%                   |0/100%                |NY(23%), CA(23%)|
|BXMT   |203   |123M             |3Y                      |7.3%(origin num was given as spread)| small|0/100%                |NY(16%), CA(15%), FL(7%), UK(13)|
|ACRE   |60    |38M              |1.4Y                    |8.5%                 |1.7%                 |0/100%                |NY, CA, FL|
|GPMT   |90    |37M              |3Y                      |8%                   |0.3%                 |0/100%                |TX(13%),CA(11%), NY(10%)|

As can be seen, LOAN and SACH have large portion of their loans on residential propertiies, while the rest four on the list live entirely upon commericial properties.
As a result, the loans originated by LOAN and SACH are much smaller than those commercial loan lenders. They also has a much higher turnover rate and are able to charge a higher interests rate. All four commercial loan lenders originate a small amount of subordinate mortgage, bearing greater risks. Considering the tiny proportion of those subordinate mortagages, why not just avoid them all together is beyond me.

With its 16 years of operation, Manhattan Bridge is still a local business with 80% residential loans, while its peers aggressively expand their business. The management's conservative and precaution can be seen from its disciplined lending policy(only show a few here):
1. Limits the maximum loan amount to the lower 9.9% of the portfolio
2. In addition to the first lien mortgage on the property, each loan is guaranteed by the principals of the borrower. To my best knowledge, LOAN is the only one required personal guarantee for each of its loan.

As a result, LOAN keeps a remarkable track record of zero foreclosure since it commencing business in 2007. As a comparision, at Dec 2022, SACH has 8.8% of its loans in the process of foreclosure.

### Liability
The main resouce of capital for loan lenders are various type of debts. LOAN has 21.4M line of credit with personal gurantee by the CEO and
5.8M senior secured notes issued on 2016 via its subsidary. Other loan lenders, however, resorts to other type of liabilities including repurchase facility, convertible notes, securitized debts(MBS, CLO).

|company                       |LOAN|SACH|CMTG|BXMT|ACRE|GPMT|
|------------------------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|3-year average liability/asset|42% |61% |71% |82% |73% |74% |

<!---管理层有意识的保持低债--->
<!---也是品控导致的低增长的结果, cite--->

As can be seen, LOAN has a liabiilty/asset ratio of 42%, much lower than those of its peers. Such a low level of debt is a result of LOAN's risk-averse management style, which I will talke in more details in the last section. Low debt level also positions the company to benefit from turbulent market conditions since money recklessly offered to real estate investors, based upon loose underwriting standards and infalted property valuation, disappears in such environment.

### Equity
Of course LOAN had also raised capital via public offering. The management has been careful about the timing of offering to maximize existed shareholders' value. More details on this can be found in the section on management quality.

## Earning power
<!---table of past 10 years' rev, net income, dividends
  1. only decline of rev, net income 2019-2021 when housing market correction + covid
--->
LOAN achieved positive earnings for the past 14 years. During that time, its net income has been growing with compounded rate of 18%. Its earnings slightly plateued during 2018-2021 as a result of a housing price correction in 2019 followed by the pandemic.

The quality of LOAN's reported earnings is high, thus not much of adjustments are needed. With just 5 employee and a $5000 rent office, the depreication is very small. Its net incomes are quite close to its owner's earnings since most of them are paid out as dividends.

|          |2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|TTM |
|----------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|Revenue(M)|1.8 |2.4 |3.3 |3.8 |5   |6.2 |6.2 |6   |5.6 |7.8 |9.4 |
|op margin |64% |70% |74% |78% |80% |82% |84% |80% |80% |82% |82% |
|Net income|0.9 |1.4 |2.2 |2.8 |3.5 |4.2 |4.5 |4.3 |4.4 |5.2 |5.3 |

<!----|Dividends |0.03|0.17|0.325|0.375|0.4 |0.48|0.48|0.42|0.485|0.5|0.45|---->

<!---table of ROA, interest income/expense, expense ratio (averge of past three years)
  1. ROA is the highest with lowest debt ratio
  2. using expense ratio to explain why ROE is high
  3. mention the how frugal the CEO is, 1)move headquater away 2) get rid of software
--->
The table below shows ratios I calculated to demonstrate LOAN's superb profitability. 
Each number are averaged over the past three years.

|company             |LOAN|SACH|CMTG|BXMT|ACRE|GPMT|
|--------------------|-----|----|----|----|----|----|
|op expense/rev*     |18.6%|25% |15% |14% |19% |33% |
|interest income/cost|4.6  |2.2 |2.3 |1.8 |2.5 |2.2 |
|ROA                 |7.2% |4%  |2.3%|1.3%|1.7%|NA**|
|ROE                 |12.3%|9.5%|6.3%|6.3%|6.5%|NA**|

1) I exclude revenue unrelated to loan lending activity. For CMTG, BXMT, ACRE and GPMT I include the expected loss reserve in the calculate of their revenue.
2) GPMT has negetive earning for two out of three years.

As can bee seen, LOAN achieved the highest ROE among its peers. Consider the lowest leverage LOAN has been used, this is no small feat.
LOAN's superb profitability results from its lower operating expenses, higher interest charged and lower debt used. For every dollar paid for debt interest, LOAN generate $4.6 interest income, twice as much as those of its peers.

How does LOAN's profitability evolved historically? This is shown in the table below

|                       |2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|used for valuation|
|-----------------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|-------|
|income/loan outstanding|12% |10% |11 %|11 %|11 %|11 %|12 %|10 %|9 % |9 % |10%    |
|fee/loan outstanding   |3%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%  |2%     |
|SAG/revenue            |36% |30% |26% |22% |20% |18% |16% |20% |20% |18% |18%    |
|interest income/expense|4   |4.2 |4.7 |4.7 |4.1 |3.6 |3.9 |4.6 |5.6 |3.7 |4      |  

We can see that these ratios are pretty stable. Assuming those average values hold into the future, I can get the following formula for LOAN's net income:
> revenue = loan outstanding * (10% + 2%)
> 
> expenses = revenue*(18% + 10/12/4) = revenue*39%
> 
> earning = loan outstanding * 0.073

The point is that I identify the loan portfolio balance as the main driver of LOAN's earning. Next I will analysis LOAN's loan portfolio in detail.

## LOAN growth potential
<!---decompose loan balance into # of loans * loan size
  1. table of # of loan, loan size, commerical %, non NY %
  2. # of loan is plateaued for past 5 yeaers.
  3. expanding to FL is slow, advantage is local market, doubt the results of such expansion
  4. loan size increases could be results of two improvement
    4.1 more commercial loans
    4.2 increase of residential loan size (up of building costs)
--->

|                       |2013|2014|2015|2016|2017|2018|2019|2020|2021|2022|
|-----------------------|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|----|
|No. loan outstanding   |60  |86  |97  |97  |120 |132 |135 |128 |134 |122 |
|average loan balance(M)|0.24|0.28|0.32|0.36|0.37|0.4 |0.4 |0.45|0.5 |0.6 |
|No. commercial loan %  |9%  |5%  |2.5%|4.6%|5%  |10.9%|6.6%|4.6%|6% |9%  |
|Properties in FL %     |0   |0   |0   |0   |0   |0   |0.7%|2.4%|4.6%|4.1%|

In the table above, I show the historical number of loans and average loan size, two possbile drivers of Manhattan Bridge's loan portfolio growth. 
As can be seen, the number of loans stablized after 2019 around 130, suggesting that the capacity in NY area is probably already saturated.  
LOAN has been trying to expand its business into Florida market. However, as can be seen from the numbers, the progress on that front is slow. 
There are two reasons to question the possibility of sucessful expanding into FL market. Firstly, LOAN's success so far largely based upon its staff's familarity of local market
and its accumulated local customer base, both of which are non-transferable into other geographical locations. Secondly, the small team, 5 staff, and not using any electronic system might further slow the expansion down. Finally, I didn't see anywhere that the managers advocate their expansion into FL or any resource commitment to such endeavours. Therefore, the expansion into FL will be slow and it's better not to get our hope high.

On the other hand, the average loan balance grows at 10% consistantly for the past 10 years. According to a report by the New York Building Congress, the average cost of 
building in NY grow annually at 2%-3%. How to explain the rest 7%? I conjecture that the loyal developers of LOAN has been growing and working on larger projects. 

To further increase the loan balance, Manhattan Bridge could originate more commercial loans, which has a much larger average balance than those of residencial loans. However, as we can see, the percent of commercial loan stays below 10% for the past 10 years. Since LOAN has been a niche player focusing on small developers, I suspect further increase on commerical loan is out of its expertise thus might not be realistic. Also notice that interests that can be charged on commercial loan are much lower than those on small residential loan, thus whether increasing commericial loan proportion is beneficial is unclear. 

Therefore, I conclude that the most reliable driver of Manhattan Bridge's future loan portfolio growth is the continue growth of its average loan size. Thus we can further
write the earning as follows:

> earning = average loan size * # of loans * 0.046 = 9.5 * average loan size

Now we are ready to calculate LOAN's intrinsic value.
<!---conclusion: conservative 5%, --->
## Valuation
### Earnings power value
<!---assume no earning increase
 1. earning power using app chosen of discount rate
 2. discrepancy from net asset value: intangible value
--->
If we assume LOAN's business neither grow or shrink, we get its earnings power value of 65.3M by using TTM net income of 5.22M and a discount rate of 8% (twice of 30y treasury yield). I attribute this premium over its 43M book value to LOAN's intangible assets: its intimate knowledge of the local market, accumalated customer base and superb risk management. However, I believe there is still more to LOAN's intrinsic value.

Now according to my analysis from last section, LOAN's portfolio growth has been drived by its increasing average loan size. I assume the average loan balance will growth at 5%, half of its historical value, for next 10 years and a 2% terminal growth rate thereafeter. The DCF formula gives a intrinsic value of $105M, again, using 8% discount rate. Notice that this calculation does not include the possibility of other growth dimensions, i.e., succesful expansion to FL and more commercial loans, at all. 

As the time of this writing (Dec 2023), LOAN are traded in the range of 43M~50M. I would say margin of satefy is large at any price below 65M. 

<!---income projection
  1. Project loan balance, assuming same no. of loan and a growth rate
  2. Use past 10 year average of interest income/loan, origination fee/loan, income/expense ratio to predict revenue
  3. Use past expenses/rev ratio to calculate net income
  4. Do the discounting with WACC
--->

<!---assume historical compound rate 10%--->

## Management
When the valuation of a comapny is largely based upon the prediction of its future cash flow, examination of the quality of management is paramount.
For a business much resembles banking, superb quality of managment is even more crucial. As Buffett has said, "bank is a good business as long as you don't do dumb things".

### Rational financing activities
   Since LOAN is organized as a REIT, 90% of its earning is required to be distributed to its shareholders. To further avoid corporation tax, REITs usually distrubte slightly more than its net income, resulting accumulated defict on their balance sheet. Therefore, examing management's rationality by look at how company's earning is allocated is unaccessible. What left to study is  LOAN's stock buy-up and offering history.

As mentioned several times in its letters to shareholders, the management tries to only issue new shares at a higher price than the prveious offering. As we can see below this is indeed the case: each time the stock is offered at a new high.
  
|public offer|07/2021|07/2018|08/2016|05/2015|07/2014|
|------------|-------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
|price       |$7.2   |$4.3   |$3.3   |$ 2.2  |$1.2   |

LOAN has also been buy back shares in 2017, 2018 and 2020, when markets were experiencing panic and a significant drop in prices. Although the amounts are small (around 0.5%), recall that REIT holds no retained earnign, it is still showing management's effort to increase shareholders' value. The CEO also aggresively buy stocks himself, which will be mentioned in the last part of this section.
### Candor with past mistake
During the subprime crisi in 2008, LOAN incured 0.7M loss on marketable securities. This is a time when LOAN just get started with its lending business and still had some of its yellow pages buisness left. If it were not for that loss, 2008 would be the first year LOAN record positive net income since it transformed into loan lending business.

How did the CEO deal with it? Not only the loss was recognized as 'other than temporrary decline in the market value of marketable securities' in the income statement, the CEO confessed in the Letter to Shareholders and promised "we have learned our lesson and took strong measures to ensure that write downs like that won't reocuur". All marketable securities were disposed next year and I never see any marketable securities appear on its statements till today.
### Risk aversion and frugality

From its inception, the management of LOAN has maintained a prudent and restrained attitude towards risky expansion. Its commitment to risk aversion also aligns with a culture of frugality. This is illustrated by select excerpts from LOAN's Letters to Shareholders presented below. 

Recall that 2008 was the year LOAN's lending business took off. However, in that year's letter to shareholders, the CEO said "We generated an enormous deal flow yet we had to diligently review and analyze each and every deal in order to cherry-pick the most attractive and least risky opportunities." 

In 2011, reveune of LOAN had doubled since 2008, but the CEO decide to moved the HQ from Manhattan to Gret Neck, NY. He explained that "the move did not adversely effect our op but it did allow us to lower our operating expenses. We now save more than 50% on our rend and in addition, we save immensely on city taxes, transp and parking". Shareholders always love to see their management hold dear to heart the philosophy that "a dollar saved is two dollars earned".

Although the company's reveune quadrupled to $4M, in both 2014 and 2015 the CEO expressed his worries: "I personally believe that Brooklyn and Manhattan are deep in a bubble zone and are overwhelmed with inventory. Therefore, we stay away from deals that we find over priced."  As a result of this pessimistic outlook, in 2014 LOAN sold call option against the three two-family house purchased in 2011 (all got exercised that year).

Next year, the company decided to terminate its use of computer software.

In 2016, after another 3 years of average 30% revenue growth, the CEO reminded its shareholders: "Our challenge as a short-term responsible real estate lender to professional investors is to control our natural desire to grow and continue practicing our strict discipline. "


### CEO's stake in the company
CEO has 22.76% shares of the company, 1M of which are restricted shares that can be vested after 2026. Since 2011 the CEO has been giving his personal guarantee on company's line of credit, currently 83% of its total debt. During the market plummet on March 2020, the CEO bought 50K shares himself and posted on his linkedin page. He also forgo part of his salary and bonus several times to reach the dividends targets of the year.

## Risk
Company performance entirely relies on the 5 employees. CEO is 58 years old and it seems a lot of things (the personal garantee on the line or credit, company's culture etc) hinge on his incumbent. Is there anyone can take up his mantle? However, I doubt the CEO will retire before 2028 when he can exercise fully his restrict shares. 
