---
layout: post
comments: false
title:  "Property Management Sector in China"
excerpt: "Don't throw the baby out with the bathwater"
date:  2024-05-30
---

### Background
Value investors cherish bear markets filled with pessimism as they offer great bargain opportunities. Conversely, when the market keeps making new highs, like the current US market, finding high-quality undervalued stocks is nearly impossible. Consequently, more and more value investors must seek bargains in special situations such as spin-offs and reorganizations. However, today's US market is so efficient that even bargains in these special situations are becoming scarce.

Meanwhile, the Chinese stock market is undergoing a major correction. The world's second-largest economy has been hit hard by its strict COVID quarantine policy. Consumer confidence is low, new home prices have fallen at the fastest pace in nearly nine years, and the population has declined for the first time since 1960. The situation in Hong Kong is also bleak. The HSI has declined for five years since its 2018 peak. E-commerce giants like Tencent, Alibaba, and JD are selling  for PEs in the low-teens.

Does this end my write-up? Should I just recommend buying Tencent, Alibaba, and JD and sit tight? While I'm confident those trades would be profitable, especially Tencent, I can offer something better. One advantage small investors have is the ability to invest in small-cap stocks for higher returns.

### Property management sector
Instead of sticking to these large-cap stocks, consider the property management (PM) sector in China. In this industry, you can easily find a dozen companies with more than 20% ROE before COVID, zero debt, and high dividend ratios. With so much cash on hand, several of them are trading for single-digit EV/FCF. So, what’s the catch? Let me explain.

All of these property management companies are directly affiliated with real estate developers. They are either subsidiaries of these developers or part of the same conglomerate. As a result, a large portion (up to 99% a few years ago) of the buildings managed by these PM firms come directly from their affiliated developers. Unsurprisingly, the suspicious aura surrounding China's developers has spread to these PM companies. In fact, some developers were accused of embezzling cash from their PM subsidiaries to address their own liquidity issues. Consequently, their prices have dropped more than 80% since 2021, mirroring their developer affiliates.

Yet within these risks, opportunities emerge. Despite the uncertainties in China's real estate market, the management of hundreds of millions of existing buildings remains indispensable. Therefore, those who can weather the current industrial turbulence are poised to thrive in the future. Specifically, companies that can maintain high margins amidst a widespread decline in affiliation contributions are the strongest contenders. Hence, my strategy is simple: 1) Rank all PM companies based on the aforementioned criteria. 2) Select the top choices. 3) Hold a portfolio of them.

For profitability, ratios like ROE and gross margin suffice. The metrics I choose to measure the impact of developer affiliation are:

1. Revenue contribution from independent third parties: A high figure here indicates a company's genuine brand power and operational excellence.
2. Percent of accounts receivables from and prepayments to affiliated developers: A high value may signal financial difficulties for the developer and high credit risk for the PM company.
3. Gross profit contribution of value-added services to non-property owners (NPO): This segment, present in the statements of every PM company, encompasses pre-delivery services, consulting services, and community space services for developers. PM companies exploit this avenue to inflate profits. Given its typically high margin among different segments, I assess its gross profit contribution, not revenue. Lower values in this metric ensure less distortion in a company's profitability.

Below, I present my top 4 choices, along with further details for each.

### Four companies I recommend

Company| EV/after-tax EBIT|ROE | Gross margin | PM Gross margin |
:---|:---:|:----:|:----:|:---:|
New Hope (3658)| 0.7| 18% | 34% | 27% 
Jinmao (816)| 2.8 | 23% | 27.6% | 15.8% 
Binjiang (3316)| 7.6 | 35% | 24.8%| 18.3%
Poly (6049) |4.8 |16.7% | 19.6% | 14.6% 

| % revenue from thrid parties | % of AR from affilated developers | % gross profit of NPO| Payout ratio|
|:---:|:----:|:----:|:----:|
| 39.6% | 35.2% | 13.6%|59.4%|
| 48.6% | 53% | 30% |41.3$|
| 43.9%| 15.8%| 25.6%|50.9%|
| 41% | 21.29% | 13.2% |39.8%|

##### **New Hope Service**
The business of New Hope (NH) Service is quite unique. Firstly, both NH Service and NH Property are part of the NH Group, a Fortune 500 company primarily focused on agriculture, livestock, and food, particularly dairy. NH Property, although not publicly traded, maintains a strong balance sheet, evident from the prospectus of its recent AAA bond issuance. Furthermore, NH Property is a relatively minor player in the Chinese market (ranked No. 50), and the non-developer background of the NH Group makes NH Service appear less risky.

Secondly, NH Service has minimal contribution from (NPO) segment. In fact, in 2022, NH Service terminated its exclusive sales service agreement with NH Property.

Thirdly, NH Service boasts a PM segment gross margin of 27%, the highest among its peers. This can be attributed to its regional concentration and operations in second-tier cities. With the NH group was founded 1997 in Sichuan province, where over 50% of its managed buildings are located, NH Service enjoys a regional monopoly reflected in its above-average PM fee of 2.95 RMB/sqm. This, coupled with low operating costs in second-tier cities, contributes to its high margin.

Finally, 23% of NH Service's revenue originates from its 'life service', which includes catering to commercial buildings and operating community grocery stores. With a direct supply of ingredients and food products from the Group's production line, this segment operates with a 39.5% gross margin. Coupled with its high PM margin, NH Service achieved an overall gross margin of 35%, the highest in the industry, despite the continuous decline in NPO contribution.

##### **Jinmao Service**
Jinmao Service has the 2nd highest gross margin, likely due to its relatively high NOP contribution. The receivables from and prepayment to its affiliated developers are the highest among four. However, I won't worry too much given its parent company, Sinochem Corporation, is a state-owned multinational conglomerate. Jinmao's current EV/EBIT is merely 2.8. Even assuming its NOP contribution will drop by another 50%, the forward EV/EBIT is just 3.1. While perhaps not the best among my selection, Jinmao is cheap enough to be included.

##### **Binjiang Service**
Binjiang is a reknown brand in Zhejiang Province, focusing on high-end services and charging the highest PM fee in the industry at 4.2 RMB/sqm. Maintaining a ROE of around 36% for the past three years is no small feat. Although New Hope and Jinmao have higher gross margin, their ROE is lower than Binjiang due to substantial cash reserves. Given the unlikelihood of them distributing majority of their cash, considering they just IPOed few years ago, this indicates inefficiencies in capital allocation and poses a risk of future value-destructive capital deployment. Other metrics for Binjiang also appear solid, notably the lowest percentage of account receivables from affiliated party. Its credit risk management is conservative, with any receivables oustanding more than 2 years being compeletely written off.

##### **Poly Property Service**
Poly Property Service (PPS) stands out as the most boring and low-risk option. While its ROE may not be exceptionally high, PPS has achieved a steady annual ROE growth of 10% over the past four years, a notable achievement amidst a time when most PM companies saw their earning power decline. The relatively low gross margins can be attributed to two factors: Firstly, its size, with revenue reaching 15 billion, is ten times that of the previous three companies. Secondly, 67.4% of its revenue comes from basic PM services, the highest proportion in the industry. This segment typically yields lower margins compared to various "value-added" services that other companies utilize to boost their margins. Thirdly, PPS demonstrates prudent credit risk management and maintains a low percentage of receivables from affiliated developers. Finally, its parent is Poly Property, which is the subsidary of China's Poly Group Corporation, another state-owned Forture 500 conglomerate. The Corporation was formed in 1984 as an arms-manufacturing wing of the People's Liberation Army, so I would say PPS is pretty bullet-proof from the risk associated with the real estate industry. 

### Conclusion
This concludes my analysis of the PM sector. I recommend holding a portfolio of these four companies for several reasons: 1) It's difficult to determine the absolute best among them, 2) all of them are attractively priced, 3) Jinmao and New Hope are  illiquid, and 4) each company offers unique aspects such as its business model and regional focus, providing certain diversification.

The idea of this post is first inspired by a great [interview](https://3gcapital.com/files/Value%20Investor_Oct31_2022_3G%20Capital.pdf) of Pavel Begun, and I thank him for suggesting the addition the divend payout ratios.
