---
layout: post
comments: false
title:  "KE Holdings"
excerpt: "CIFAR-10 is a popular dataset small dataset for testing out Computer Vision Deep Learning learning methods. We're seeing a lot of improvements. But what is the human baseline?"
date:  2024-05-05 
---

### BEKE

|:---|:----|:---------|:----|
|Price ($) | 16 | Cash Equiv. (B$) |10.7|
|ADS Out. (B) | 1.2 | Debt (B$)| 0.05 |
|Market Cap (B$) | 2.0 | Industry| Real estate service|

### Thesis
BEKE is a leading integrated online and offline platform for housing transactions and services in China. In 2023, when China was struggling in its recovery from the impact of COVID-19, BEKE achieved a 65% ROIC, showing its competitive advantage. With prevailing pessimism surrounding the Chinese economy, particularly its real estate sector, there are hidden gems in housing service industry. In the past few months, BEKE have been trading around 9~15x EV/UFCF --- a bargain price for a great company.  I use RMB throughout this writing unless stated otherwise.

### History and Business
BEKE's founder once said "BEKE is 18 years of Lianjia + 2 years of Beike". To fully grasp BEKE's business model, it is essential to comprehend China's local market history and how BEKE evolved from a local realtor shop two decades ago to China's largest housing transaction platform, with a GTV of 3200T. For readers pressed for time, feel free to skip this section and revisit it later for background information if necessary.

In 2001, when Lianjia launched in Beijing, China's house market was chaotic due to a lack of regulation. Websites like Kjj were filled with fake listings to lure customers. Realtors frequently raise asking prices covertly and sabotage each other's deals. The list goes on. These issues, along with failed attempts to enforce transparent transactions, led to Lianjia's agents leaving in 2004, prompting the company to reform at a fundamental level. 

To combat fake listings and create a reliable industry database, Lianjia started developing its "housing dictionary" in 2008. They established a dedicated team to verify landlord and property paperworks from various sources and conduct detailed physical property inspections. Additionally, they systematically surveyed buildings to determine the number of units in each city. (a bit of context: in China, most people reside in a condo in a 30-floor building. Just in Beijing there are 7 million such condos. Public trading of properties was only allowed after 1998, thus properties with missing registration or title certifications are not uncommon at that time.) Essentially, Lianjia undertook the task of building and maintaining the Chinese MLS. After 10 years of efforts and investment of 5 billion RMB, the dictionary now encompasses 2 billion authentic properties across 326 cities. Each entry includes meticulous details with 500 data fields, allegedly surpassing the accuracy and completeness of those maintained by the National Bureau of Statistics.

Meanwhile, as Lianjian expanded, it began testing the Agent Collaboration Network (AGN) concept to forster collabration between agents. AGN standardizes agent collaboration by breaking down complex home sales/rental transactions into standard steps. Agents, even from different branches, can collaborate, each handling one or more steps. Lianjian's algorithm automatically distributes commissions based on everyone's contribution. With system and data set up, Lianjia also needed people who can share its values. To achieve this, they prioritize hiring recent college graduates and train them in-house. Today, 50% of BEKE's agents possess college degrees or higher.

In 2018, Lianjia became the largest brokerage brand in China, boasting 6000 offices and 120,000 agents. Staying true to its mission of reinventing the industry, Lianjia launched the Beike platform and made its "housing dictionary" and AGN available to all brokerage brands willing to join. Additionally, customers can browse listings and agent profiles for free on Beike's app.

This is the Ke Holding we know today. As of 2023, BEKE generates 77B in revenue, sourced from commissions under its Lianjia brand and platform fees from 268 brokerage brands on Beike. 40% of its revenue comes from existing home services, including home sales and rentals. 47% stems from new home transactions, where BEKE acts as a sales channel for real estate developers. The other two income streams, home renovation and emerging services, are relatively small but growing fast.
