---
layout: post
comments: false
title:  "China Yuchai International Limited"
excerpt: "A high-quality net-net stock. As a low point of industry cycle, now is a good time to buy."
date:  2024-05-21 
---
### **CYD**

|:---|:----|:---------|:----|
|Price ($) | 8.3 | Cash Equiv. (M) |846.9|
|ADS Out. (M) | 40.8 | Debt (M)| 357.9 |
|Market Cap (M) | 340 | Industry| Engine manufacturing|

CYD is a holding company controlled by Hong Leong Asia Ltd in Singapore. Its main business is a 76.4% stake in Yuchai, China's No.2 (mainly diesel) engine manufacturer for trucks, buses, construction, and agricultural machinery. It also has a 48.9% stake in a hotel operation in Malaysia, which will be ignored in this write-up due to its negligible (0.2%) revenue contribution.

Currently, CYD has net current assets of $611 million, and its stock trades for $336 million. This is a Ben Graham net-net stock with a large margin of safety. If the stock trades up to the net current asset value, the total return will be 81%.

Most net-net stocks today are problematic: either they are heavily in debt, or their businesses are unprofitable and declining. Neither of these issues apply here: 

Founded in 1951, Yuchai has built a reputation for high product performance and excellent customer service in China. It has generated profits and distributed dividends for the past 20 years. Its long-term debt ratio is merely 3.5%, which is very healthy for a capital-intensive manufacturing business. In fact, CYD's cash is twice its total debt.

In 2021 and 2022, Yuchai's net income shrank by 50%, and CYD's stock price dropped to $7 per share from its 2020 peak of $16. However, as I will detail below, Yuchai's poor performance was a result of industry-wide and macroeconomic difficulties, not a fundamental deterioration of its business. In fact, Yuchai maintained its No.2 market share during this challenging time.

National VI(a) emission standards were enforced in July 2021. A pre-buy of cheaper and less strict National V vehicles in the first half of the year led to significant inventory build-up and much lower demand for National VI trucks in the second half of 2021. National VI engines not attaining economy-of-scale production contributed to a lower gross margin. To make things worse, in the second half of 2021, commercial vehicle unit sales declined by 36.5% nationwide. Meanwhile, Yuchai's R&D spending kept increasing, preparing for the implementation of National VI(b) standards in 2023. As a result, Yuchai's net income dropped by 47.6% in 2021.

In 2022, although the gross margin recovered to its 2020 level, commercial vehicle sales in China dropped by another 36%, back to its 2016 level. Area lockdowns and travel restrictions led to supply chain interruptions, construction declines, and weakened consumer confidence. Yuchai recorded a negative operating cash flow for the first time in 20 years, as did all other competitors. Things are slowly recovering: in 2023, national diesel engine sales increased by 23%, and Yuchai's CFO was almost back to its 2020 level.

Commerical vehicle sales volume is a major indicator of China's economy. Consequently, engine manufacturing is a cyclical business. The eventful 2020-2022 represented the down leg of another industrial cycle. Historically, CYD's stock price has largely resonated with industrial cycles. For instance, as national diesel engine sales reached a bottom around the end of 2015, Yuchai's profit and CYD's stock price hit a multi-year low. As demand gradually recovered, so did Yuchai's profit and stock price. In fact, CYD's stock price tripled in the next two years.

Yuchai's sales will continue to improve as long as 1) the entire industry is not perishing so the cycle will persist, and 2) Yuchai maintains its leading position. The demand for diesel engines, especially heavy engines, will persist for the foreseeable future because EV transition will first occur in the private vehicle sector. Not to mention that Yuchai has been researching and developing products for electric and hydrogen-powered systems for years. Its brand name, financial prudence, 50 years of R&D investment, and rising technical barriers due to increasingly strict national emission standards make me confident about Yuchai's industrial position.

Yuchai's operating margin will likely increase in the next few years as well. First, production costs will keep dropping as National VI engines are widely adopted in China. Second, the increasing R&D expense will take a break for the coming years, as most National VI and Tier-4 engines (for off-road vehicles) development programs have reached commercial production. Using the average operating margin of 4.8% over the past 10 years and assuming 2020-level revenue of $3.1 billion, I expect mid-cycle earnings of around $120 million. This represents a 3.6 price-to-forward-earnings ratio for CYD.

Considering all the aforementioned factors, now seems to be a great time to buy and wait for the cyclical upward trend. The stock is illiquid for two reasons: 1) CYD is US-listed, but its main holding is a local Chinese business. Most Chinese investors who are familiar with Yuchai cannot invest, while US investors have little confidence in Chinese stocks in general. 2) Only 38% of the stocks are publicly held. The illiquidity leads to large volatility, creating great entry points and significant returns for value investors. Finally, value investing funds such as Brandes Investment and Chou Associates are among the institutional investors.

### Catalysts:
1. Outrageous value
2. Economic and industry recovery 